Hamas, as in
the last few moments, announced
that Yaya Sinwar will replace
Ismail Haniya
as the group's political leader.
Sinwar, of course,
is the group's leader in Gaza.
The change comes after Haniya was killed,
if you remember, last week in Tehran.
We'll have more on that.
But this news just coming in on Hamas
announcing Sinwar
as the head of the political bureau
in the meantime
and staying in the region, U.S.
officials tell CNN Iran
and its proxies
are beginning preparations
for retaliatory attack against Israel.
The entire Middle East
has been on edge for days.
In fact,
after a series of assassinations
blamed on Israel,
including the deaths of senior Hamas
and Hezbollah
figures, two officials say
fears are higher right now
about a major response from Hezbollah
rather than Iran.
Today, Hezbollah leader Hassan
Nasrallah, using the vowed
his group will act whether alone
or with regional allies.
Hezbollah has already declared
a new face,
what it calls
a new phase in its months
long cross-border conflict with Israel.
Today,
it says it fired
a swarm of drones
at Israeli military targets
and a Hezbollah rocket
barrage triggered
fires near Kiryat Shmona
in northern Israel,
adding to the tensions.
The U.S.
military is blaming
Iran backed militias
for a suspected rocket
attack on this airbase in Iraq,
calling it a dangerous escalation.
Seven U.S.
service members were injured.
Let's get more on all these threads.
And Natasha Bertrand
is following developments
for us from the Pentagon.
So, Natasha, we've heard
Iran say they will respond.
The question now is when and how.
What are you hearing from U.S.
sources and U.S.
officials as to what retaliation
that retaliation may look like right now?
Well, U.S.
officials don't seem to know
exactly what that's going to look like.
And that's in part
because they don't know
if Iran even knows at this point
what they're going to do,
but they are more concerned
now, we're told
about what Hezbollah
is going to do about than
what Iran is planning.
We're told that in recent
days, the fears have escalated
about the idea
that Hezbollah could actually act alone
and not be coordinated
with Tehran in its response.
And of course, Hezbollah
is just right there
on Israel's northern border.
And so this could be something
very significant
that we see from Hezbollah.
Or, you know, it could result that
all the diplomacy
that we're seeing in the background
could result in all sides
kind of de-escalating tensions.
It does not seem necessarily like that
is what is going to happen at this point.
U.S.
officials are bracing
for some kind of retaliatory action,
but they're trying
to essentially temper it
and try to make sure
that any kind of action
will not result, of course,
in a large number of civilian casualties,
that it will be more largely symbolic
and allow either
Tehran or Hezbollah
or both to kind of save face,
you know, in
light of these Israeli strikes
in both Beirut and Tehran.
And so we know from U.S.
officials that both Iran
and Hezbollah
have been making
some kind of preparations
for some kind of attack on Israel.
But again, you know, U.S.
officials have declined to say
what exactly that looks like.
I will note, however, that before
the attack, the Iranian attack
against Israel in April, U.S.
officials saw very, very clear
signs of very large movements by Iran,
including the movement of,
for example, major
missile launchers and things
like that into position
to prepare for a major attack.
They're not necessarily
seeing those kinds of huge signs
at this point, forecasting something
potentially as significant
as a massive missile barrage
like we saw a few months ago.
But of course, they're
basically preparing for the worst here
and engaging in this
very frenetic diplomacy
behind the scenes
to try to ease tensions even further.
So we'll have to see if that works.
Natasha, appreciate it.
Thank you very much.
Let's talk
more about the growing threat
of a wider war in the Middle East.
Joining me now is Colin Clarke,
director of policy and research
at the Suzanne Group, a well known face.
He on the show.
Colin, great to see you.
Just some breaking news
that we've had in the last few minutes.
I'm not sure if you quoted.
We've now heard
that Hamas has issued a statement
announcing that its leader in Gaza,
Yahya Sinwar, will replace Ismail Haniya,
of course, who was assassinated
in Tehran last week
as the head of its political bureau.
What do you make of this announcement?
Thanks for having me.
I think the announcement
could be quite significant.
And it's really interesting
because you now
see Hamas potentially attempting to,
bring closer
the political bureau
and the military wing
by having a military leader
like Sinwar
kind of dual hatted,
functioning in both roles.
It certainly points to a victory
for the hardliners within Hamas.
Some of the other names
that have been mentioned, Khalid Meshaal,
has some,
issues and it's his relationship,
with some of the, you know, kind of Hamas
adjacent countries in the region,
including the Syrians and the Iranians.
And so this was likely,
a move to empower,
the more hardline militants in the group.
It could also have
reverberations into the West
Bank as well.
Yeah.
I was gonna say this doesn't bode
well because, of course,
Ismail Haniya
was part of the negotiations.
We so thought as part of the,
the wing,
the political side,
the political bureau of Hamas.
And of course, Israel
has publicly accused Sinwar
of being the mastermind
right behind
the terror attack
against Israel on October 7th.
So it begs the question of where does
where does this leave
any sort of ceasefire,
any hostage negotiations?
Now with, Yahya Sinwar as the head of the
political bureau of Hamas?
Well, I think what it
does first and foremost
is it complicates
today, after we hear a lot of discussions
about the day after and how,
the Israelis haven't
really been planning for that.
They haven't strategized
for the day after.
A lot of that is because of,
the role of Benjamin Netanyahu
and his far right allies.
They refuse to kind of think
about any kind of Gaza governance.
This really, really complicates that,
because let's say the war was to start
this week
and Sinwar was not captured, killed.
He'd be the individual,
you know, representing Hamas there.
And there's no way
the Israelis are going to do business
with Sinwar
in any kind of post
conflict governance in Gaza.
Yeah. Stay with us, Colin.
I want to go to our Jeremy
Diamond, who's in Haifa
for this breaking news.
And, Jeremy,
just as we bring our viewers
up to date on this breaking news,
the Hamas announcing Shinhwa
as the head of the political bureau,
what has been the reaction
from Israel to this?
well, we haven't gotten any
reaction yet,
but but this I can tell you
what the reaction will be.
And that is to say that
he sinwar
taking over as Hamas's political leader,
first of all, increasingly blurs
the lines between Hamas,
his military wing,
and its political wing.
Yahya Sinwar was viewed as very much
the bridge between those two wings.
And in addition to that,
he is also viewed
as responsible
for the October 7th massacre.
the in the same way that Mohammad Deif
was the leader of the military wing.
There is a belief,
a strong belief,
that Yahya Sinwar
would have been intimately involved
if not in the planning,
then certainly in the decision
making about choosing to carry out
such an attack.
And, what this also does is
it makes very clear that he has sinwar
despite more than ten months of war,
is clearly alive, clearly,
still very influential within Hamas
to the point
that he is able to actually seize power
here in the wake of Ismail
Haniyeh assassination.
And what that will do
beyond what I've already mentioned,
is also clearly show that the hardliners
within Hamas are clearly being empowered.
Ismail Haniyeh,
was viewed in many
ways as a more pragmatic voice
within Hamas, as a voice
who was pushing for a cease fire,
who was willing
to make certain concessions
at the negotiating table.
And yet here Sinwar,
who has been consulted
at every step in the cease fire
negotiations, was very much viewed
as carrying the more hardline position.
and so that obviously is
I think it's pretty clear what that means
for the future of cease
fire negotiations,
for how much more difficult
it may be to actually achieve
a cease fire.
And obviously,
this will have tremendous implications.
in, in Gaza itself,
where we know that
the lack of a cease fire
is impacting Gazans, civilians
more than anyone else, perhaps.
Yeah.
And
and I assume that
Yahya Sinwar is in hiding in Gaza.
Do we know what role
he has played in these negotiations?
Well,
of course, when he was still alive,
do we know how prominent
his viewpoint,
how influential he's been in
these negotiations journey?
It's been critical
that every single juncture,
because Hamas's political leadership
outside of Gaza knew
that he could not implement a cease fire.
He could not stop the fighting
without the agreement of,
Hamas leaders in Gaza,
which effectively gave Sinwar
a veto over
every decision
that has been made
at the negotiating table so far.
but now he is in power even further,
because we're not just talking about
a veto,
we're talking about actual decision
making power and authority.
And what other thing that we should note
is that Sinwar, as
he has been consulted
at every critical juncture
that sometimes led to delays
in those negotiated options
because of the fact
that Sinwar is believed
to be hiding in tunnels under Gaza,
most likely under Communist.
it was taking
it could take as little
as our sometimes,
but oftentimes
it would take days for the messages
to go from Doha
or Cairo,
from the mediating,
from the negotiating table
into Gaza
to actually reach Sinwar
in a covert manner
without the Israelis
discovering where he was hiding.
And then for those messages,
to reach back to the negotiating
table thereafter.
And so that is going to be clearly,
another,
factor in the potential future
of those talks.
But we should note that for now,
these negotiations are effectively dead
for the time being,
at least in the short term,
following the assassination
of Ismail Haniya.
There has been no progress towards,
another ceasefire deal.
And instead, what we are talking about,
particularly where I am
now in northern Israel,
is this possibility,
very real possibility
of an Iranian attack against Israel
in retaliation
for the assassination of Ismail Haniya,
as well as potentially attacks
from Hezbollah,
which is just about 30km north of here
in Lebanon.
Jeremy, I appreciate it.
Thank you very much for coming
up for this breaking news.